>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 10: THE
UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA AGREE
TO A NEW PLAN FOR A CEASE FIRE
IN SYRIA THAT INCLUDES FIGHTING
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS TOGETHER; IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE MEN
ACCUSED OF PLANNING THE
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS STILL HAVE
NOT BEEN BROUGHT TO JUSTICE;
AND BIRDS THREATENED BY CLIMATE
CHANGE TAKE TO THE STREETS OF
NEW YORK.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA ARE
PROMOTING A NEW PLAN TO END
SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR, NOW IN ITS
SIXTH YEAR, HAVING CAUSED HALF A
MILLION DEATHS AND FORCED
MILLIONS TO FLEE AS REFUGEES.
IN TALKS IN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND,
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY AND RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER SERGEI LAVROV SAID A
COUNTRYWIDE CEASE FIRE IS
SCHEDULED TO TAKE EFFECT AT
SUNDOWN ON MONDAY.
IT CALLS FOR GOVERNMENT FORCES
OF PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD
BACKED BY RUSSIA AND REBELS
BACKED BY THE U.S. TO STOP
SHOOTING WHILE HUMANITARIAN AID
IS DELIVERED WHERE NEEDED.
>> WE BELIEVE THAT THE PLAN AS
IT IS SET FORTH-- IF
IMPLEMENTED, IF FOLLOWED-- HAS
THE ABILITY TO PROVIDE A TURNING
POINT, A MOMENT OF CHANGE.
>> Stewart: IF THE TRUCE HOLDS
FOR A WEEK, THE U.S. AND RUSSIA
INTEND TO LAUNCH AN
UNPRECEDENTED JOINT EFFORT TO
ATTACK POSITIONS HELD BY
MILITANTS FROM ISIS AND AL
QAEDA, KNOWN AS AL-NUSRA IN
SYRIA.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
FOR MORE ON THE LATEST TRUCE
EFFORT IS "NEW YORK TIMES"
NATIONAL SECURITY CORRESPONDENT
DAVID SANGER, WHO JUST RETURNED
FROM GENEVA THIS MORNING.
DAVID THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> GREAT TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Stewart: WHAT IS THE MOST
SIGNIFICANT PART OF THIS DEAL?
>> WELL, THIS DEAL IS A BIG
RISK, BUT IT'S PROBABLY A RISK
WORTH TAKING.
YOU MAY REMEMBER, ALISON, THAT
THERE WAS ANOTHER CEASE-FIRE
DEAL THAT WAS SIGNED IN FEBRUARY
IN MUNICH, AND THE PROBLEM WITH
IT WAS THAT IT ALLOWED ASSAD,
PRESIDENT ASSAD OF SYRIA, TO
CONTINUE TO JOIN IN THE THE
BOMBING OF AL-NUSRA AND, OF
COURSE, OF ISLAMIC STATE SITES,
EVEN WHILE THERE WAS SUPPOSED TO
BE HUMANITARIAN ACCESS, AND A
CEASE-FIRE ELSEWHERE AND A
CEASE-FIRE AGAINST ANY OF THE
OPPOSITION GROUPS.
THE PROBLEM WAS THAT ASSAD USED
THE EXCUSE OF BOMBING AL-NUSRA
TO ALSO BOMB OPPOSITION FORCES
THAT HAVE BEEN FIGHTING HIM AND
THAT THE AMERICANS HAVE BACKED.
AND SO THE THE QUESTION WAS IS
THERE A WAY FOR THE UNITED
STATES AND FOR RUSSIA TO JOINTLY
TAKE PART IN TARGETING AL-NUSRA
AND ISLAMIC STATE FORCES, AND
KEEP ASSAD'S FORCES OUT OF THE
AIR?
>> Stewart: FOR A DEAL AS
COMPLEX AS THAT TO CAN COME
TOGETHER, WHERE YOU HAVE TWO,
ESTRANGED POWERHOUSES AGREEING
TO WORK TOGETHER MILITARILY,
SOMETHING SIGNIFICANT HAS TO
HAVE CHANGED.
WHAT CHANGED?
>> WELL, FOR THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, WHAT CHANGED WAS
THE ENTRY OF THE RUSSIANS INTO
THE WAR.
YOU REMEMBER IT WAS A YEAR AGO
THAT PRESIDENT OBAMA AT THE
WHITE HOUSE SAID THAT THE
RUSSIANS WOULD REGRET THIS DAY,
THAT THEY WOULD GET COMPLETELY
BOGGED DOWN IN HAD WAR.
WELL, IN FACT, AS IT TURNED OUT,
THE RUSSIANS HAVE DONE A PRETTY
GOOD JOB OF SHORING UP ASSAD.
HAD THE THE RUSSIANS NOT
ENTERED, IT'S ENTIRELY POSSIBLE
THAT ASSAD'S GOVERNMENT WOULD
HAVE COLLAPSED BY NOW.
SO SUDDENLY HAD BECAME A BATTLE
IN WHICH TWO BIG SUPERPOWERS TO
COME TO SOME AGREEMENT.
CENTRAL PROBLEM WITH IT, ALISON,
IS THERE ARE SO MANY OTHER
PLAYERS HERE-- THE IRANIANS,
DIFFERENT OPPOSITION GROUPS, THE
SAUDIS-- THAT IF THEY'RE NOT ALL
BUYING INTO THIS AGREEMENT, TO
WHICH THEY WERE NOT A PARTY
NEGOTIATING, THIS WHOLE THING
COULD FRACTURE APART.
>> Stewart: SECRETARY KERRY
SAID THIS IS NOT BASED ON TRUST.
THIS IS BASED ON COMPLIANCE AND
OVERSIGHT.
WHO IS GOING TO BE MONITORING
THIS?
WHO IS GOING TO BE PROVIDING
THAT COMPLIANCE AND OVERSIGHT?
>> WELL, THE OVERSIGHT IS EASY
FOR EVERYBODY IT SEE.
THE UNITED NATIONS WILL SEE IT.
THE U.S. HAS GOT ENORMOUS
ASSETS-- SATELLITES, DRONES,
OTHER THINGS-- TO SEE WHAT'S
GOING ON.
THE QUESTION IS, IF ASSAD
VIOLATES AGREEMENTS, WILL THE
RUSSIANS REALLY REIGN HIM IN.
AND THEY DON'T, WOULD OR COULD
THE UNITED STATES THREATEN
MILITARY ACTION.
THERE ARE MANY IN THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION THAT BELIEVE
PRESIDENT OBAMA MADE A
FUNDAMENTAL ERROR A FEW YEARS
AGO WHEN HE DID NOT DECIDE TO
CRATER THE RUNWAYS-- SOMETHING
THE UNITED STATES HAS KNOWN HOW
TO DO SINCE BEFORE WORLD WAR
II-- AND KEEP ASSAD'S PLANES
FROM TAKING OFF.
>> Stewart: DAVID SANGER FROM
THE "NEW YORK TIMES," THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: TOMORROW IS THE 15th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE ATTACK ON
AMERICA THAT CLAIMED NEARLY
3,000 LIVES AFTER AL QAEDA
TERRORISTS FLEW PASSENGER JETS
INTO THE WORLD TRADE CENTER IN
NEW YORK, THE PENTAGON OUTSIDE
WASHINGTON AND A FIELD IN
PENNSYLVANIA.
AFTER 9/11, TERROR SUSPECTS
CAPTURED OVERSEAS WERE DETAINED
BY THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION AT A
MILITARY BASE IN GUANTANAMO BAY,
CUBA, AND A NEW SYSTEM WAS
DEVELOPED TO HANDLE THEIR CASES.
WHILE PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
FAVORED FEDERAL COURT TO
PROSECUTE TERROR SUSPECTS, THE
NATION'S ONLY PENDING 9/11 CASE
IS UNRESOLVED AT GUANTANAMO.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S PHIL
HIRSCHKORN REPORTS ON THE DEBATE
OVER THE BEST VENUE TO BRING
TERRORISTS TO JUSTICE.
>> Reporter: ON SEPTEMBER 11,
2001, JEAN NEBBIA LOST HER BIG
BROTHER, STEVEN SCHLAG.
>> STEVEN WAS A CHARACTER.
IF YOU DIDN'T LIKE HIM, HE WOULD
DO SOMETHING TO YOU TO MAKE SURE
YOU LIKED HIM.
>> Reporter: A GENEROUS SOUL WHO
LOVED TO SKI.
A BOND TRADER FOR CANTOR
FITZGERALD, SCHLAG WAS TRAPPED
ON THE 105th FLOOR OF THE NORTH
TOWER, ABOVE THE FIRST PLANE
HIJACKERS CRASHED INTO THE WORLD
TRADE CENTER.
A TEACHER'S ASSISTANT FROM NEW
JERSEY, NEBBIA VOLUNTEERS FOR
THE 9/11 TRIBUTE CENTER GIVING
TOURS OF THE MEMORIAL SITE.
>> I GET TO LET PEOPLE KNOW
EVERYTHING ABOUT HIM.
MY THOUGHTS ARE TO CELEBRATE
WHAT I HAD WITH HIM.
>> Reporter: NEBBIA HAS ALSO
STARED DOWN HER BROTHER'S
ALLEGED KILLERS IN PERSON AT
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS CALLED
MILITARY COMMISSIONS AT THE U.S.
NAVAL BASE IN GUANTANAMO BAY,
CUBA.
THESE FIVE MEN ARE THE ONLY
PEOPLE IN U.S. CUSTODY NOW
CHARGED WITH A DIRECT ROLE IN
PLANNING 9/11.
LONG AFTER THEIR CAPTURE AND
DETENTION IN SECRET C.I.A.
PRISONS OVERSEAS, THEY WERE
TRANSFERRED TO GUANTANAMO TEN
YEARS AGO.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS KHALID
SHEIKH MOHAMMED, KNOWN AS
K.S.M., WAS THE ARCHITECT WHO
BROUGHT THE PLANES PLOT TO AL
QAEDA LEADER OSAMA BIN LADEN.
RAMZI BINALSHIBH WAS ALLEGEDLY
HIS RIGHT-HAND MAN, THE LIAISON
WITH THE 19 HIJACKERS WHO
CARRIED OUT THE ATTACKS.
WALID BIN ATTASH ALLEGEDLY
HELPED TRAIN THE HIJACKERS IN
CAMPS IN AFGHANISTAN.
MUSTAFA AL-HAWSAWI AND ALI ABDUL
AZIZ ALI ALLEGEDLY FUNNELED
MONEY TO THE HIJACKERS.
>> THEY'VE ALREADY ADMITTED TO
IT.
THEY'LL GET CONVICTED, AND THE
DEATH PENALTY WILL BE JUSTICE
SERVED.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT OUTCOME IS
NEITHER GUARANTEED NOR COMING
SOON.
WITH THE MILITARY COMMISSIONS
MIRED IN PROCEDURAL ROADBLOCKS
AND INTERMINABLE DELAYS,
PROSECUTORS AND DEFENSE
ATTORNEYS INVOLVED SAY IT WON'T
BE CONCLUDED BEFORE THE YEAR
2020.
FORMER UNITED STATES ATTORNEY
DAVID KELLEY WAS PART OF A TEAM
OF FEDERAL PROSECUTORS IN NEW
YORK THAT WROTE THE BOOK ON
PROSECUTING MAJOR TERRORISM
CASES.
THE FIRST CHAPTER WAS THE TRIAL
FOR THE 1993 WORLD TRADE CENTER
TRUCK BOMBING, WHICH CONVICTED
FOUR DEFENDANTS, EACH SENTENCED
TO 240 YEARS IN PRISON.
>> YOU KNOW, WE WERE THE "GO TO"
FOLKS PRE-9/11 AND THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM.
AND THEN. ON SEPTEMBER 12, IT
WASN'T SO MUCH THAT WAY ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: KELLEY WON A JURY
CONVICTION AGAINST THE ATTACK'S
RINGLEADER, RAMZI YOUSEF, WHO
WAS SENTENCED TO LIFE IN PRISON.
>> COLD-BLOODED, INDEED.
AND HE COULD, YOU KNOW, LOOK AT
YOU AND SMILE, AND RIP YOUR
HEART OUT AT THE SAME TIME.
>> Reporter: IN THE MID-1990s,
KELLEY'S COLLEAGUES IN THE
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
ALSO CONVICTED OMAR ABDEL
RAHMAN, THE BLIND SHEIK FROM
EGYPT, AND NINE OTHER ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS FOR A CONSPIRACY TO
CARRY OUT ATTACKS ON NEW YORK
CITY LANDMARKS LIKE THE GEORGE
WASHINGTON BRIDGE AND THE UNITED
NATIONS HEADQUARTERS.
>> I THINK THE MOST MEMORABLE,
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT THING
ABOUT IT FOR ME IS THE DEGREE TO
WHICH IT INDICATED WHAT WAS
COMING.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL MUKASEY WAS
THE JUDGE WHO PRESIDED OVER THE
TRIAL AND USED HIS DISCRETION TO
SENTENCE ABDEL RAHMAN TO LIFE
BEHIND BARS.
>> IT WAS NOT A GREAT ORDEAL OR
A TOUGH CALL.
>> Reporter: BUT MUKASEY WORRIES
THE PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF
EVIDENCE AT THAT TRIAL AIDED
AMERICA'S ENEMIES.
>> THE GOVERNMENT WAS REQUIRED
TO SERVE A LIST OF UNINDICTED
CO-CONSPIRATORS THAT IT KNEW
ABOUT, AND THEY DID.
ONE NAME ON THAT LIST WAS OSAMA
BIN LADEN.
VERY FEW PEOPLE HAD EVER HEARD
OF HIM AT THE TIME.
WE LATER FOUND OUT THAT WITHIN
TEN DAYS OR TWO WEEKS AFTER THAT
LETTER WAS SERVED ON THE
DEFENDANTS, IT HAD FOUND ITS WAY
TO KHARTOUM, WHERE BIN LADEN WAS
THEN LIVING, AND SO THAT HE WAS
AWARE NOT ONLY THAT THE
GOVERNMENT KNEW ABOUT HIM BUT
ALSO WHO ELSE THE GOVERNMENT
KNEW ABOUT.
>> Reporter: AFTER BIN LADEN
SOLDIERS TRUCK-BOMBED U.S.
EMBASSIES IN KENYA AND TANZANIA
IN 1998, KILLING MORE THAN 200
PEOPLE, INCLUDING A DOZEN
AMERICANS, FEDERAL PROSECUTORS
IN NEW YORK CONVICTED FOUR MEN
FOR THE ATTACK IN A JURY TRIAL
THAT ENDED A FEW WEEKS BEFORE
9/11.
ALL RECEIVED LIFE SENTENCES.
FORMER FEDERAL PROSECUTOR DAVID
KELLEY BELIEVES THOSE EARLY
CASES PROVED TERRORISM TRIALS
WORK.
>> NOT ONLY BECAUSE IT'S
EFFECTIVE BECAUSE IT GETS
TERRORISTS OFF THE STREETS, BUT
BECAUSE IT'S DONE IN A WAY THAT
MEETS ALL OF OUR CONSTITUTIONAL
REQUIREMENTS.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THOSE
REQUIREMENTS IS THAT ANY
DEFENDANT'S STATEMENTS BE
VOLUNTARY, NOT COERCED.
KELLEY SAYS IT'S A MYTH THAT
ONCE TERRORISM DEFENDANTS GET A
LAWYER, THEY AUTOMATICALLY STOP
TALKING.
>> THE OLD ADAGE IS, BAD GUYS
JUST WANT TO TALK, AND THEY
TYPICALLY DO.
AND NOTWITHSTANDING THEIR
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE A LAWYER,
THEY TYPICALLY WILL FOREGO THAT,
AT LEAST AT THE OUTSET, AND
THEY'LL GIVE YOU A LOT OF
INFORMATION.
>> Reporter: BEFORE THE ATTACKS
ON THE WORLD TRADE CENTER IN NEW
YORK AND THE PENTAGON IN
NORTHERN VIRGINIA, THE F.B.I.
HAD TRIED TO GET INFORMATION,
UNSUCCESSFULLY, FROM AL QAEDA
OPERATIVE ZACARIAS MOUSSAOUI,
WHO WAS ARRESTED FOR A VISA
OVERSTAY THREE AND A HALF WEEKS
BEFORE 9/11 AFTER AROUSING
SUSPICION IN A MINNESOTA FLIGHT
SCHOOL.
SINCE MOUSSAOUI ENDED UP
PLEADING GUILTY, HIS TRIAL IN
VIRGINIA FEDERAL COURT FOCUSED
ONLY ON HIS SENTENCE.
INSTEAD OF THE DEATH PENALTY,
THE JURY OPTED FOR LIFE IN
PRISON WITHOUT THE POSSIBILITY
OF PAROLE.
>> MOUSSAOUI SITS IN A CELL 23
HOURS A DAY, DOESN'T EVEN HAVE
NATURAL LIGHT.
>> Reporter: EDWARD MACMAHON LED
THE DEFENSE TEAM.
TO DATE, MOUSSAOUI IS THE ONLY
PERSON CONVICTED BY THE U.S. IN
ANY VENUE FOR THE 9/11
CONSPIRACY.
>> IT WAS A VERY DIGNIFIED
PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY A
FEDERAL JUDGE IN A FEDERAL
COURTROOM UNDER RULES OF
EVIDENCE.
A JURY DELIBERATED, CAME TO ITS
VERDICT.
WAS THE CLIENT... DID HE ACT
OUT?
OF COURSE, THAT HAPPENS LOTS IN
CRIMINAL CASES.
>> Reporter: MOUSSAOUI'S ANTICS
AND HIS TRYING TO REPRESENT
HIMSELF CAUSED DELAYS, BUT SO
DID THE GOVERNMENT'S BLOCKING
ACCESS TO AL QAEDA LEADERS IN
MILITARY CUSTODY, LIKE K.S.M.,
THAT MOUSSAOUI WANTED TO TESTIFY
ON HIS BEHALF.
FROM ARRAIGNMENT TO VERDICT IN
MAY 2006, THE CASE TOOK FOUR AND
A HALF YEARS.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE A BLINK OF TIME
COMPARED TO WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
CUBA.
TEN YEARS LATER, THEY DON'T EVEN
HAVE A TRIAL DATE.
IF I WENT INTO COURT AND TOLD A
JUDGE IN ALEXANDRIA THAT I
NEEDED TEN YEARS TO PREPARE FOR
TRIAL, I'D GET TEN WEEKS.
>> I BELIEVE DEEPLY IN BOTH
SYSTEMS.
>> Reporter: CHARLES "CULLY"
STIMSON HELPED WRITE THE RULES
FOR THE MILITARY COMMISSIONS AS
DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE IN THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION.
HE'S ALSO A FORMER MILITARY
JUDGE AND FEDERAL PROSECUTOR.
STIMSON HELPED MANAGE THAT
TRANSFER OF THE 9/11 DEFENDANTS
TO GUANTANAMO IN SEPTEMBER,
2006.
>> THEY WOULD BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
THEY WOULD BE BROUGHT OUT OF THE
SO-CALLED SHADOWS AND THAT, FOR
THOSE THAT COULD BE TRIED, THEY
WOULD BE SUBJECTED TO MILITARY
COMMISSIONS.
>> Reporter: THE LEGAL
PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING
GUANTANAMO DETAINEES HAVE BEEN
SUBJECTED TO THREE SUPREME COURT
DECISIONS REQUIRING CHANGES IN
THE MILITARY COMMISSIONS SPELLED
OUT IN TWO ACTS OF CONGRESS.
THERE HAVE BEEN ENDLESS DEBATES
ABOUT WHAT EVIDENCE IS
ADMISSIBLE, INCLUDING THE
MISTREATMENT OF THE DEFENDANTS
IN C.I.A. CUSTODY.
STIMSON IS AS DISAPPOINTED AS
ANYONE THAT THE 9/11 MILITARY
COMMISSIONS ARE TAKING SO LONG.
IT COULD BE 20 YEARS AFTER 9/11
BEFORE WE HAVE A 9/11 MILITARY
COMMISSION COMPLETED.
>> AND THAT LEAVES A BAD TASTE
IN MY MOUTH AND EVERYONE
WATCHING THIS SHOW.
THE MEASURE OF JUSTICE IS NOT
SPEED; IT'S FAIRNESS.
AND YOU KNOW, THE MILITARY
COMMISSIONS ARE NOT SPEEDY, AND
THEY ARE NOT QUICK JUSTICE.
>> Reporter: AND IT'S NOT A FLAW
OF DESIGN?
>> I THINK THAT IT'S BECAUSE
IT'S NEW AND BEING TESTED
AGGRESSIVELY AND APPROPRIATELY
BY THE DEFENSE IN EVERY WHICH
WAY TO SUNDAY.
IT'S TAKING TIME.
THE BEST REASON IT SHOULD STAY
AT GUANTANAMO IS BECAUSE SO MUCH
WORK HAS BEEN DONE.
>> Reporter: STIMSON POINTS OUT
THAT WORK INCLUDES 20 WEEKS OF
PRE-TRIAL HEARINGS, 50 ORAL
ARGUMENTS, 217 SUBSTANTIVE
MOTIONS, AND 500,000 PIECES OF
EVIDENCE TURNED OVER TO THE
DEFENSE TEAMS.
>> THERE'S A LAW IN PLACE, A
FEDERAL LAW IN PLACE THAT SAYS
THEY CAN'T BE BROUGHT TO THE
UNITED STATES.
SO, UNLESS AND UNTIL CONGRESS
CHANGES THAT LAW AND THERE'S THE
POLITICAL WILL TO BRING THEM TO
FEDERAL DISTRICT COURT AND HIT
THE RESTART BUTTON, IT'S NOT
GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: THAT LAW PASSED
AFTER THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED IN LATE 2009 IT
INTENDED TO TRANSFER THE 9/11
DEFENDANTS FROM GUANTANAMO TO
NEW YORK FOR TRIAL IN THE
FEDERAL COURTHOUSE LESS THAN A
MILE FROM GROUND ZERO.
THE DECISION REFLECTED NOT ONLY
A PREFERENCE OF VENUE BY THE
PRESIDENT AND ATTORNEY GENERAL
ERIC HOLDER, BUT A TRACK RECORD:
SINCE 9/11, FEDERAL PROSECUTORS
HAVE WON MORE THAN 350
TERRORISM-RELATED CONVICTIONS IN
FEDERAL COURT.
BESIDES MOUSSAOUI, THE LIST
INCLUDES FOILED PLOTTERS LIKE
SHOE BOMBER RICHARD REID,
UNDERWEAR BOMBER UMAR FAROOK
ABDULMUTALLAB, AND WOULD-BE
SUBWAY BOMBER NAJIBULLAH ZAZI.
BY CONTRAST, MILITARY
PROCEEDINGS AT GUANTANAMO HAVE
YIELDED ONLY EIGHT CONVICTIONS,
HALF LATER REVERSED, AND
GENERALLY LIGHTER SENTENCES.
FOR EXAMPLE, FORMER BIN LADEN
DRIVER SALIM HAMDAN WAS SENT
HOME TO YEMEN AFTER A CONVICTION
AND SERVING FIVE-AND-A-HALF
YEARS AT GUANTANAMO.
BEFORE MOVING ANY 9/11
DETAINEES, THE OBAMA JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT HAD A TEST CASE:
AHMED GHALIANI, AN EAST AFRICA
EMBASSY BOMBER CAPTURED IN
PAKISTAN IN 2004 AND SENT TO
GUANTANAMO.
HE BECAME THE FIRST AND ONLY
GUANTANAMO DETAINEE EVER
TRANSFERRED TO U.S. SOIL AND
STOOD TRIAL IN MANHATTAN FEDERAL
COURT.
>> GHAILANI, YOU'LL RECALL,
ALMOST BEAT THE CASE.
HE WAS ACQUITTED OF ALL THE
MURDER COUNTS RESULTING FROM THE
BOMBING OF THE EMBASSIES.
HE WAS CONVICTED ONLY OF
CONSPIRACY TO DAMAGE GOVERNMENT
PROPERTY.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT WAS ENOUGH
TO GET HIM A LIFE SENTENCE.
>> IT WAS ENOUGH TO GET HIM A
LIFE SENTENCE BECAUSE OF THE
INTENDED CIRCUMSTANCES, BUT IT
WAS AN AWFULLY CLOSE MATTER.
>> Reporter: THAT CLOSE VERDICT,
PLUS FEARS THAT DEFENDANTS WOULD
HAVE A PLATFORM IN OPEN COURT,
AND CONCERNS ABOUT PUBLIC SAFETY
IN LOWER MANHATTAN, FUELED
OPPOSITION TO MOVING THE 9/11
TRIAL.
>> IS THERE A SECURITY CONCERN?
YEAH, BUT IT'S YET ANOTHER
HURDLE THAT CAN BE OVERCOME.
I SAW GREATER TRAFFIC JAMS WHEN
WE CAME OUT WITH MARTHA
STEWART'S CONVICTION THAN WHEN
WE CAME OUT WITH ANY OF THE
TERRORIST CONVICTIONS.
>> Reporter: STILL, BY 2011,
OBAMA AND HOLDER CHANGED COURSE.
THE 9/11 DEFENDANTS REMAINED AT
GUANTANAMO.
>> IF, WHEN OBAMA HAD TAKEN
OFFICE, IF HE'D HE DONE WHAT HE
SAID AND HE HAD MOVED THOSE FIVE
GENTLEMEN TO NEW YORK CITY, THEY
WOULD HAVE ALREADY BEEN TRIED
AND CONVICTED.
NO QUESTION IN MY MIND.
AND I FEEL SAD FOR THE 9/11
FAMILY MEMBERS WHO STILL WANT
JUSTICE AND WHO FLY DOWN TO CUBA
AND WATCH THESE RIDICULOUS
PROCEEDINGS IN CUBA.
>> Reporter: FOR TWO YEARS AT
GUANTANAMO, EDWARD MACMAHON
ASSISTED THE DEFENSE TEAM FOR
9/11 DEFENDANT WALID BIN ATTASH.
FROM WHAT HE SAW, HE BELIEVES
THE MILITARY IS MISCAST TO
HANDLE THE 9/11 CASE.
>> YOU WOULDN'T ASK THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TO GO TAKE BAGHDAD
AND CHARGE INTO THE PALACE
HOLDING BRIEFCASES.
I JUST THINK THERE'S A LOT OF
INSTITUTIONAL INABILITY TO PUT
ON A DEATH PENALTY TRIAL IN
GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA.
THEY DON'T HAVE JUDGES THAT HAVE
EVER DONE IT.
THE PROSECUTORS HAVE NEVER DONE
IT.
>> Reporter: WHEN JUDGE MUKASEY
RETIRED FROM THE BENCH IN 2006
AND BECAME PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH'S ATTORNEY GENERAL THE
FOLLOWING YEAR, HIS VIEW OF
TERRORISM TRIALS IN FEDERAL
COURT HAD DIMMED.
>> WE'VE ALREADY GOT A
REPUTATION FOR HAVING A FAIR
SYSTEM.
WE DON'T NEED TO ESTABLISH IT.
THE SENSE THAT WE HAVE TO PROVE
SOMETHING TO THE WORLD, I THINK,
IS RIDICULOUS.
>> Reporter: MUKASEY ALSO SEES A
BENEFIT IN THE DEFENDANT'S
ONGOING MILITARY DETENTION OF
THE 9/11 SUSPECTS.
>> THE MOST VALUABLE FEATURE OF
ANY OF THESE DEFENDANTS IS AS A
SOURCE OF INTELLIGENCE.
YOU GET SOME INFORMATION.
YOU GO BACK, CHECK ON IT.
MAYBE GO BACK FOR MORE.
ONCE HE BROKE, KHALID SHEIKH
MOHAMMED WAS PROVIDING
INFORMATION FOR MONTHS.
>> Reporter: YOU WOULD STAY THE
COURSE WITH THEM FOR THESE 9/11
DEFENDANTS?
>> NOT SURE.
I THINK I WOULD.
I THINK STARTING AGAIN WOULD BE
A TRAVESTY.
>> Reporter: GUANTANAMO IS NOT A
CHEAP FACILITY TO KEEP RUNNING.
THESE DAYS, THE PRISONER CENSUS
BELOW A HUNDRED.
IT'S ESTIMATED IT'S $3 MILLION
TO $4 MILLION PER PRISONER, PER
YEAR.
>> RIGHT.
YOU KNOW WHAT THE CURE FOR THAT
IS?
>> Reporter: NO.
>> BRING MORE PRISONERS.
>> Reporter: ALSO WILLING TO
WAIT FOR THE OUTCOME AT
GUANTANAMO IS JEAN NEBBIA, WHO
LOST HER BROTHER ON 9/11.
>> WE NEED JUSTICE.
IT'S FRUSTRATING, BUT I HAVE NO
DESIRE TO SEE THEM ON AMERICAN
SOIL.
>> Stewart: WHAT HAPPENED TO
SOME OF THE REMNANTS OF THE
WORLD TRADE CENTER?
FIND OUT AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: ACCORDING TO THE
NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY,
CLIMATE CHANGE POSES A THREAT TO
LARGE NUMBERS OF NORTH AMERICAN
BIRDS.
NOW, A STREET ART PROJECT HERE
IN MANHATTAN AIMS TO CALL
ATTENTION TO THEIR PLIGHT.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S MEGAN
THOMPSON REPORTS.
>> Reporter: WALK THESE URBAN
STREETS OF UPPER MANHATTAN, AND
YOU JUST MIGHT CATCH A GLIMPSE
OF A TUNDRA SWAN OR A ROSEATE
SPOONBILL-- JUST A FEW OF THE
BIRDS NATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA,
ONES ALSO PAINTED BY THE 19th
CENTURY ARTIST JOHN JAMES
AUDUBON, WHO LIVED NEARBY.
>> YOU LISTEN TO THESE BIRDS
CHIRPING, AND YOU'RE LIKE, "OH,
MY GOD, WE MAY NOT... MIGHT NOT
HEAR THAT SOUND IN 50 YEARS."
>> Reporter: MARK JANNOT, A VICE
PRESIDENT AT THE NATIONAL
AUDUBON SOCIETY, SAYS THE
WHIMSICAL PORTRAITS OF "THE
AUDUBON MURAL PROJECT" ARE MEANT
TO SEND A VERY SERIOUS MESSAGE.
A 2014 AUDUBON SOCIETY STUDY
FOUND THAT HALF OF ALL NORTH
AMERICAN BIRDS ARE THREATENED BY
CLIMATE CHANGE THIS CENTURY AS
THEIR HABITATS SHIFT AND SHRINK.
>> IT MIGHT BE A GRASSLAND BIRD
AND IT'S GOING TO SHIFT INTO
AREAS THAT ARE FORESTS, SO THAT
IT WON'T BE SUITABLE TO LIVE
THERE.
>> Reporter: TO GET THE WORD
OUT, THE AUDUBON SOCIETY
PARTNERED WITH LOCAL ART GALLERY
OWNER AVI GITLER.
HE'S WORKING WITH ARTISTS TO
PAINT ALL 314 OF THE THREATENED
BIRDS.
>> SO FAR, WE'VE PAINTED ABOUT
45 BIRDS.
WE HAVE A LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE
WE FINISH THE 314, BUT WE'RE
HOPING TO HAVE PAINTED ABOUT 150
BIRDS BY THE END OF 2016.
>> Reporter: LIKE THE BIRDS THEY
DEPICT, THE MURALS CAN BE TRICKY
TO SPOT.
MANY ARE PAINTED ON STORES'
SECURITY GATES, WHICH ARE ONLY
ROLLED DOWN WHEN THE BUSINESS IS
CLOSED.
SOME PAINTINGS COVER ENTIRE
WALLS.
OTHERS ADORN PANELS INSERTED IN
DOORS AND WINDOWS.
>> OVER HERE, YOU HAVE A GREAT
PAINTING BY TOM SANFORD WHO
LIVES IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S JOHN JAMES AUDUBON
CONTEMPLATING THE CERULEAN
WARBLER.
OVER HERE YOU HAVE A MALLARD BY
THE PENNSYLVANIA-BASED ARTIST
GRAHAM PRESTON.
THE LAST TWO PANELS ARE OF THESE
TWO WONDERFUL BROWN PELICANS,
ONE DIVING AND ONE ABOUT TO BE
FED.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF BIRDS ON
THE LIST THAT PEOPLE ARE
SURPRISED TO LEARN THAT THEY'RE
THREATENED.
FOR INSTANCE, THE COMMON LOON,
WHICH IS THE STATE BIRD OF
MINNESOTA.
BY THE END OF THIS CENTURY, BY
2080, WILL NO LONGER BE FOUND IN
THE STATE OF MINNESOTA.
THE BALTIMORE ORIOLE WILL NO
LONGER BE FOUND IN BALTIMORE.
THE BALD EAGLE, OUR NATIONAL
BIRD, IT IS SEEN TO BE
THREATENED BY CLIMATE CHANGE IN
THIS CENTURY, AS WELL.
>> THIS MURAL WAS THE FIRST ONE
THAT WE PAINTED ON THE SIDE OF
AN ENTIRE BUILDING, OUR FIRST
BIG WALL MURAL.
THE MAIN BIRD HERE, THAT'S A
SWALLOW-TAILED KITE.
THAT COMPOSITION IS EXACTLY AS
JOHN JAMES AUDUBON PAINTED THAT
BIRD.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THE
AUDUBON SOCIETY AND I AGREED ON
FROM THE BEGINNING WAS THAT WE
WERE GOING TO ALLOW THE ARTISTS
TO EXPRESS THEMSELVES.
WE WEREN'T LOOKING TO PAINT 314
BIRDS IN THE STYLE OF JOHN JAMES
AUDUBON.
WE WANTED ARTISTS TO COME IN AND
DO SOMETHING ORIGINAL, DO
SOMETHING IN THEIR STYLE.
>> MY GRACKLE?
HE'S A BADASS GRACKLE.
HE'S THERE WITH HIS WIFE.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: NEW YORK-BASED
PAINTER EZO CU KILLZ RECENTLY
PAINTED HIS GRACKLES ON THE GATE
OF AN EYE CLINIC.
>> IT'S A LOUD BIRD AND KIND OF
LIKE OBNOXIOUS, YOU KNOW.
IT SEEMS THAT IT'S LIKE A NEW
YORK BIRD, EVEN THOUGH HE'S NOT
FROM NEW YORK.
I JUST GOT THE PICTURE OF THE
GRACKLE IN MY PHONE.
I HAVE AN IDEA OF THE
COMPOSITION THAT I WANTED TO DO.
I WANTED TO ADD SOME STRUCTURES
BEHIND IT.
SO, IT'S ALMOST LIKE NATURE
VERSUS TECHNOLOGY.
YOU KNOW, JUST, YOU KNOW, THAT'S
THE FIGHT WE'RE IN RIGHT NOW AND
KIND OF FINDING THE BALANCE IN
THAT, WHICH IS WHAT WE'RE TRYING
TO DO WITH THESE PICTURES, YOU
KNOW-- INFORM THE PUBLIC AND
EXPAND THEIR MIND.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: HILLARY CLINTON SAYS
SHE REGRETS CALLING HALF OF
DONALD TRUMP'S SUPPORTERS
"DEPLORABLE."
SHE MADE THE COMMENT AT A
CAMPAIGN FUNDRAISER IN NEW YORK
CITY LAST NIGHT.
>> TO JUST BE GROSSLY
GENERALISTIC, YOU CAN PUT HALF
OF TRUMP SUPPORTERS INTO WHAT I
CALL "THE BASKET OF
DEPLORABLES."
RIGHT?
THE RACIST, SEXIST, HOMOPHOBIC,
XENOPHOBIC, ISLAMOPHOBIC, YOU
NAME IT.
>> Stewart: IN A WRITTEN
STATEMENT TODAY, CLINTON SAID:
"IT'S DEPLORABLE THAT TRUMP HAS
BUILT HIS CAMPAIGN LARGELY ON
PREJUDICE AND PARANOIA."
SHE ALSO SAID MANY TRUMP
SUPPORTERS ARE "HARDWORKING
AMERICANS WHO JUST DON'T FEEL
LIKE THE ECONOMY OR OUR
POLITICAL SYSTEM ARE WORKING FOR
THEM."
ON TWITTER TODAY, TRUMP SAID HER
REMARKS WERE "SO INSULTING TO MY
SUPPORTERS, MILLIONS OF AMAZING
HARDWORKING PEOPLE.
I THINK IT WILL COST HER AT THE
POLLS."
AT A RALLY LAST NIGHT IN
PENSACOLA, FLORIDA, TRUMP
CRITICIZED THE F.B.I.
INVESTIGATION OF A PRIVATE EMAIL
SERVER CLINTON USED WHILE
SECRETARY OF STATE, AND
DESCRIBED HER AS IMMUNE TO
PROSECUTION FOR ANYTHING.
>> BECAUSE SHE IS BEING SO
PROTECTED, SHE COULD WALK INTO
THIS ARENA RIGHT NOW AND SHOOT
SOMEBODY WITH 20,000 PEOPLE
WATCHING, RIGHT SMACK IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE HEART, AND SHE
WOULDN'T BE PROSECUTED, OKAY?
>> Stewart: NEITHER CANDIDATE
HAD ANY PUBLIC CAMPAIGN EVENTS
TODAY.
THREE STATES CAN NO LONGER ASK
RESIDENTS TO PROVE THEIR
AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP WHEN
REGISTERING TO VOTE THIS YEAR.
IN AN ORDER ISSUED YESTERDAY,
THE U.S. COURT OF APPEALS IN
WASHINGTON, D.C., BLOCKED
KANSAS, GEORGIA AND ALABAMA FROM
REQUIRING NEW REGISTRANTS TO
SHOW A BIRTH CERTIFICATE OR
NATURALIZATION PAPERS.
ONLY KANSAS HAS ACTIVELY
ENFORCED THE LAW, REJECTING SOME
20,000 REGISTRATION FORMS.
>> Stewart: JOHN HINCKLEY, WHO
WAS FOUND NOT GUILTY BY REASON
OF INSANITY FOR TRYING TO
ASSASSINATE PRESIDENT RONALD
REAGAN 35 YEARS AGO WAS RELEASED
TODAY FROM A MENTAL HOSPITAL IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.
HINCKLEY, NOW 61, WILL LIVE WITH
HIS 90-YEAR-OLD MOTHER IN
WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA, AND HE
CAN'T VENTURE MORE THAN 50 MILES
FROM THERE.
AND FINALLY, GRETA ZIMMER
FRIEDMAN, AT THE CENTER OF ONE
OF THE MOST ICONIC PHOTOS EVER
TAKEN, HAS DIED.
AS A 21-YEAR-OLD DENTAL
ASSISTANT, GRETA WAS KISSED BY
SAILOR GEORGE MENDONSA IN TIMES
SQUARE AS THEY CELEBRATED THE
END OF WORLD WAR II.
SHE WAS 92.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.